Welcome to Slash Forward. I’ve always
said that the best protection against
unforeseen calamities is to constantly run
different scenarios in your mind. To that end,
we’re going to take a detailed look at a different
kind of alien encounter with the 1982 film
Xtro. A young man enjoying some good
old fashioned stick play with his father
suffers a devastating loss when that very same
father previously mentioned is abducted into
a dark void. With a paucity of evidence of the
terrible event, young Tony finds himself alone on
an island of emotional solitude for the next three
years...until his father Sam returns - but does
he? In this interesting take on a classic story
we’re left to wonder what the hell is going on,
in terms of the compulsions and intent of the
strange beings as the only things we ever really
learn from them are through the impulses of
Sam, who has not returned so much as he has
been reborn from the bowels of the Earth. I’m
guessing this one screwed some of you up when
you were kids. Be sure to leave a comment with any
ideas of what the aliens might have been up to,
and feel free to hit the like button if
you enjoy the video. Let’s get to it.
We open on a quaint little summer cottage
where little ToneTone, a right proper madlad,
hops a fence to steal the hubcaps off
a car. But mummy gets away. So he goes
back to playing stick whacker with papa Sam.
When he tosses that sum’ bitch into the air,
it effing explodes and drapes the sky in total
darkness. They’re victim to a persistent assault
of light and leaves and general chaos and,
when it’s all said and done, daddy is gone.
We flash forward three years to Tony
waking up, haunted by thoughts of why
Sam doesn’t want them anymore. Rachel
does her best to raise her young boy,
but is troubled by his recurring nightmares and
the fact that he can’t get over his loss despite
her finding a perfectly acceptable replacement
in Joe, the fine specimen who now shares her bed.
But then, in the cold, dark night after these
long, three years, a familiar lighted shape crests
the country hill. It cuts a path into the forest,
leaving a trail of smouldering wreckage behind
and compelling the natural earth to reconstitute a
portion of its base elements into a sort of slimy,
upside-down man. It makes a quick appearance to
rile up the locals. Luckily there is no damage
to the vehicle, but Thadeus happens
to be a total freak about cryptids,
so he’s geeking out right now. His
curiosity drives him deep into the woods,
and he doesn’t even consider turning back until
he happens upon a fleshy little wad of meat,
which tongue-lashes him just below the eyeballs
- the prime kill spot. When he doesn’t return,
Sardinia backs down the road a bit to see if
she can find him, but instead gets grabbed.
Later on, outside a nearby summer cottage, a
familiar form approaches in the dark. Inside
the current occupant is warned of potential danger
by her trusty pooch, who becomes frustrated that
she’s so dense. But then a strange noise outside
does prompt her to lock up, set the mood just
right for blood, and to load up the shotty. But,
her intruder’s already inside, and after willfully
feeding it her hand and passing out, it uses a
slimy protuberance to get her mouth pregnant.
Back at the London flat Tony has another bad
dream, prompting him to interrupt mommy’s
grown-up wrestle sesh so she can put him
back to bed. He seems to be feeling better
despite suffering from a flop sweat, and he
announces daddy’s return before revealing
that he’s been completely saturated
in life juice from an unknown source.
They call the doctor, but he doesn’t find any
signs of external injury. So, with nothing else
to worry about he wraps it up and heads on
out. Along the way Joe oversteps with advice
about what’s best for Tony while the doc suggests
this may be psychosomatic and therefore treatable
through therapy. Then Annalise, the fiery French
scientologist comes out to make him choke on his
words. So, he confirms that with his job done,
it’s in their hands and he takes his leave.
Back at the cottage, Dingo’s tucking into
a massive, sloppy pile of wet meat as his
owner wakes up feeling a bit off. She tries
to settle her GI with some refreshing water,
but baby’s not in the mood. She collapses under
the weight of her distended belly and serves up a
birthing scene for the ages. Luckily for her sleep
schedule, she gives birth to a full grown man.
Luckily for Tony, that man happens to be
his father, yea, wash up like a man, boy.
Once he’s all cleaned up, he follows a vague
memory of a past life to get himself dressed
and secure transportation. Later that
morning Rachel is awoken by a caller,
but Sam is not yet able to speak coherently and he
also accidentally melts the phone. After he rolls
up with Sardinia still in the passenger seat for
carpool purposes, he gets out and begins creeping.
Upstairs things are as normal - Tony has no
respect for anyone, Annalise is lazing about and
we learn that they’re addressing the prior night’s
events by pretending they never happened. On the
way to school they’re accosted by an old lady in
the hallway and Tony shoots that bitch. Then, as
they make their way through the traffic and bustle
of the city, Sam is close by watching and waiting.
Back at the lot a tradesman pulls
up hard and bumps Sam’s car.
When he goes to apologize, he accidentally
unpacks Sam’s lunchbox. While at the flat,
Annalise is spending her time on the
clock engaged in an afternoon delight.
It’s interrupted by a call that’s maybe
important? But I can’t focus on anything
other than how Michael is putting whatever
his mouth touched all over that milk bottle.
At the studio Joe is engaged in his side
hustle of foot photography when Rachel dips
out to go pick Tony up from school. When
she gets there the yard marm informs her
that her services are unnecessary, because
Tony’s already been picked up by his father
who she’s never met. She rushes off,
searching frantically, until overcome by
a strange feeling that leads her to Sam and
Tony. Sam can speak now, so they catch up.
After the formalities he confirms that he’s
back for good now, but from where? Who knows?
She brings him home to sort things out, and
he expresses how good it feels to be back
where he belongs on a permanent basis, which
is presumptuous. After dressing smartly in
some of his old wardrobe, a sip of Scotch
causes his memory of that fateful day to
come flooding back. Joe comes in to start
sizing things up and make preparations for
staking his claim, but the initial signs
are not promising. In a more private moment,
Joe complains about getting his feelings hurt,
and Rachel admits that she's feeling like
Sam’s explanation of what happened might
warrant picking up where they left off.
Later that night Sam slips into Tony’s room
and snatches Harry’s eggs so he can start
slurping up that sweet, sweet snake embryo.
Tony walks in at an inopportune moment and,
oh, he knows immediately what daddy’s up to.
Mostly because Harry is obviously pissed off.
Tony is so startled that he jets out of the
whole building and into the cool evening air,
bare-chested, and doesn’t stop until he’s good
and lost but with Sam still hot on his heels.
Meanwhile Rachel comes home and finds Tony’s room
empty. Insistent that Sam must have stolen him,
Joe hopes he can score some brownie points
by jogging off with her in search of Tony.
When Sam catches up with his son, he explains that
he’s changed a bit in his time away. For instance,
he needs snake eggs now. He offers to take Tony
back with him before comforting his son in a way
that I’m not sure I can describe without getting
in trouble. When Rachel and Joe return, the boys
are back and Sam plays it off like they just went
to get some sweets, but we saw what happened.
That night at dinner the adults make small
talk, which turns into a group chat about
Sam and Rachel’s relationship. The tone
escalates until Sam puts Joe in his place,
causing Joe to screech at him like a howler
monkey. Meanwhile, Tony’s spinning tops with
his mind and that freaks him out. He calls for
daddy, and Sam comes to reassure him that this
represents the new norm, and from this point
on moving toys is but a fraction of his new,
ill-defined suite of powers imbued
upon him during the basement incident.
Meanwhile, Harry packs up and leaves, looking
to start over in a new place more amenable to
nurturing snake babies. Unfortunately, first
stop on his journey is Mrs. Goodman’s flat.
And in this house, they are indiscriminate in
dealing with serpentine vermin. She returns his
tenderized remains to Rachel, causing Tony to go
into a fit of rage, but not yet Tony, not yet.
Later on, while doing his sketches,
Rachel delivers some more clothes to Sam
and also lays down some mixed messages.
After she leaves he tries to calm the
fire in his brain by huffing some gas.
Tony dreams of Harry, and in his focused rage
he manifests some clown magic. But this is that
silly type of clown that thirsts for blood.
Then Mrs. Goodman answers a knock at the door
and is surprised when an unknown visitor begins to
make his way in. She’s even more surprised to see
it’s a man-sized toy equipped with a functional
harpoon gun. Failing that, it pursues her with
its assault rifle, but she does a cracking job
of hiding out. Unfortunately, her sweet tooth
cannot be tamed, and she gives an indication
as to where the bayonet should be inserted.
The next morning Joe sulks off to work in
an introspective mood. We know it’s bad,
because when he gets to the studio, he attempts
to drown his sorrows in some refreshing juice.
Back at home it appears he left Rachel a Dear
John letter. Now free to pursue her interests,
she goes out to reminisce with Sam whose
memory is slowly coming back into focus.
But then when Annalise is sorting the wash,
she finds some strange items in Sam’s jacket.
But he has no memory of them, very convenient.
Regardless, she pops in to say hi to Joe and make
sure he’s aware that she’s going to the cottage
with Sam, so bye. Back at the flat Annalise
is doing a real shit job of cleaning...if
that is her job, still not fully sure
of her role - and the doorbell rings,
announcing Michael’s arrival. As
a certified sex fiend, she sneaks
him into her room before letting Tony know she
needs to go take a nap get roasted by a child.
He gives her about five minutes before
insisting on a game of hide and seek,
which she agrees to in the hope it will shut
him up. Determined to get back to her lover,
she attempts to make quick work of this.
Tony throws his voice, making her think he’s
on the elevator. She chases it up and down, but
ultimately discovers it to be unoccupied - except
for the clown. I guess Tony was mad at her
or something? As Michael waits patiently,
Tony sucks out her lifeforce - or blows
something into her, it’s not totally clear.
While all this is going down, Rachel and
Sam arrive at the old cottage to see what
additional memories they can reconstruct for
Sam. But then when they get to the front door
hmmmm, someone short who burns things
I would say. They go in and look around
and Rachel finds that someone left the gas
on, exactly how Sam likes it. But before
we can go deeper Sam elects to run off
to find his favorite spot in the woods.
Michael finally gets fed up with
waiting and goes to look for Annalise,
but he doesn’t find her on the mantle and then a
toy tank rolls in and tries to straight up blast
his face through the back of his head. He seeks
refuge in the bathroom where he finds Annalise,
busy nurturing her new egg sac.
Plus, there’s a black panther.
Back in the woods Rachel finds a presence
and runs to tell Sam. But when she finds him,
he’s all rolled up and quivering like a baby
bird. She brings him back inside so he can
get all warmed up and cozy. Then, as she goes to
call home, he pulls out a hair plug and tosses it
into the fire, which is definitely not going to
raise the ambiance. She’s unable to reach Tony,
because he’s busy enjoying a milkshake while his
clown friend repurposes the appliances for their
activities. You know, guy stuff. Rachel then calls
the super to ask if he can go check in. Meanwhile,
whatever they’ve got going on in the bathroom
comes to fruition. The clown carefully collects
the eggs and prepares them for incubation. So,
they’re too busy to answer when Mr. Knight rings.
This either puts Tony in a bad mood, or he’s
now using his powers to kill anyone who garners
his attention. Because, when Mr. Knight gets
downstairs, he steps off the elevator into total
darkness, and has his throat slit by a bouncing
light. Not sure why he didn’t see that coming.
With no callbacks Rachel enlists Joe’s
help in trying to get some answers.
As he casually cleans the birdcage, he notices
a striking resemblance between the jacket photo
and a story about a dead woman recently found
in the area. He tries to call back right away,
but Sam knows what’s up and heats up
the phone box with his hot little hands.
Conveniently, as soon as Joe steps out, Tony
is there already, resting on the hood of his
car like a calendar girl. With that task
completed, he takes Tony to the cottage.
Hopefully they drive slow, because mommy
is busy reconciling. Unfortunately, Sam has
turned into a monster and he apologizes
for his gruesome appearance profusely,
before he skeets. Rachel now ponders her life
choices as Sam lurks around in the shadows. Then
the boys arrive and Joe tells Tony to cool out
in the car while he goes in to see what’s what.
Rachel meets him in the entryway to make
a quick getaway, but Tony’s already found
his way into the forest where he is lovingly
caressed by his rapidly deteriorating father.
Joe chases them down for a man-to-man
confrontation, but Sam is no man and
he shrieks a high-pitched noise into Joe’s face
that causes his brains to leak out of his ears.
As Sam’s facade melts away, Rachel tries
to get to where they are. She eventually
emerges into a grassy clearing engulfed in
light and shapes where she is confronted by
daddy Sam’s final form. Rachel screams for
Tony, but is rightly reluctant to go to him,
and then they disapparate anyway and
shoot off into the vibrating cosmos.
Rachel returns to the surreal
mindscape that is now her home.
Looking to make the best of a
bad situation, she greets her
consolation babies and welcomes them into
her heart. But, she is immediately betrayed.
Xtro is a film that transcends its B-movie
pedigree. Yea, it’s silly and has some nonsensical
moments. I’m not sure why Tony was killing
people and his powers were somewhat ill-defined.
It wasn’t really clear what the process
was here for whatever they were doing,
or why it had to be done in order to arrive
at the conclusion the film presents us.
Also I’m still not sure what Annalise’s job
was. But despite all these minor quibbles,
this movie goes hard and it absolutely rips.
In some ways it benefits from the lack of
explanation, because the premise is based on
interactions with aliens whose intentions
and capabilities are completely unknown.
In that regard, anything goes. This opens
up the storytelling a bit by allowing for
a wide range of possibilities. This
can obviously go wrong in some cases,
but I think they pulled it off in Xtro with
its highly stylized and surreal visuals.
I’m not sure what the stick snapping into
lightning and turning the sky black had to
do with an alien arrival, but it was pretty
sweet. It would also be pretty standard to
design some sort of flying machine that they
matted out and placed over the background,
but bypassing that completely and making it just
a glowing shape was inspired. It also added an
unnerving element in that we never actually saw
the alien beings. We only ever saw the after
effects of their presence through the various
forms that Sam or Tony’s hatchlings took on.
All of this made for a very unsettling overall
experience that, I think, elevated this film
beyond the typical expectations for movies
enjoyed solely due to the charm of their failings.
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you
can support the channel through
donations or merch. Any donation unlocks
uncensored movie reviews of Lifeforce,
Under the Skin and Possessor, with others to
be added over time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.